---
layout: page
orig_url: http://www.education.gov.uk/schools/teachingandlearning/curriculum/primary/b00199012/history
---
The statutory programme of study for history at Key Stages 1 and 2, and the attainment target level descriptions are accessible from these pages.

<h1 id="key-stage-1">Key Stage 1</h1>

During Key Stage 1 pupils learn about people's lives and lifestyles. They find out about significant men, women, children and events from the recent and more distant past, including those from both Britain and the wider world. They listen and respond to stories and use sources of information to help them ask and answer questions. They learn how the past is different from the present.

<h2 id="ks1-knowledge,-skills-and-understanding">Knowledge, skills and understanding</h2>

<h3 id="ks1-chronological-understanding">Chronological understanding</h3>


1. Pupils should be taught to:


    1. place events and objects in chronological order


    1. use common words and phrases relating to the passing of time (for example, before, after, a long time ago, past).

<h3 id="ks1-knowledge-and-understanding-of-events,-people-and-changes-in-the-past">Knowledge and understanding of events, people and changes in the past</h3>


2. Pupils should be taught to:


    1. recognise why people did things, why events happened and what happened as a result


    1. identify differences between ways of life at different times.

<h3 id="ks1-historical-interpretation">Historical interpretation</h3>


3. Pupils should be taught to identify different ways in which the past is represented.

<h3 id="ks1-historical-enquiry">Historical enquiry</h3>


4. Pupils should be taught:


    1. how to find out about the past from a range of sources of information (for example, stories, eye-witness accounts, pictures and photographs, artefacts, historic buildings and visits to museums, galleries and sites, the use of ICT- based sources)


    1. to ask and answer questions about the past.

<h3 id="ks1-organisation-and-communication">Organisation and communication</h3>


5. Pupils should be taught to select from their knowledge of history and communicate it in a variety of ways (for example, talking, writing, using ICT).

<h2 id="ks1-breadth-of-study">Breadth of study</h2>


6. During the key stage, pupils should be taught the knowledge, skills and understanding through the following areas of study:


    1. changes in their own lives and the way of life of their family or others around them


    1. the way of life of people in the more distant past who lived in the local area or elsewhere in Britain


    1. the lives of significant men, women and children drawn from the history of Britain and the wider world (for example, artists, engineers, explorers, inventors, pioneers, rulers, saints, scientists)


    1. past events from the history of Britain and the wider world (for example, events such as the Gunpowder Plot, the Olympic Games, other events that are commemorated).

<h1 id="key-stage-2" class="reset-numbering">Key Stage 2</h1>

During Key Stage 2 pupils learn about significant people, events and places from both the recent and more distant past. They learn about change and continuity in their own area, in Britain and in other parts of the world. They look at history in a variety of ways, for example from political, economic, technological and scientific, social, religious, cultural or aesthetic perspectives. They use different sources of information to help them investigate the past both in depth and in overview, using dates and historical vocabulary to describe events, people and developments. They also learn that the past can be represented and interpreted in different ways.

<h2 id="ks2-knowledge,-skills-and-understanding">Knowledge, skills and understanding</h2>

<h3 id="ks2-chronological-understanding">Chronological understanding</h3>


1. Pupils should be taught to:


    1. place events, people and changes into correct periods of time


    1. use dates and vocabulary relating to the passing of time, including ancient, modern, BC, AD, century and decade.

<h3 id="ks2-knowledge-and-understanding-of-events,-people-and-changes-in-the-past">Knowledge and understanding of events, people and changes in the past</h3>


2. Pupils should be taught:


    1. about characteristic features of the periods and societies studied, including the ideas, beliefs, attitudes and experiences of men, women and children in the past


    1. about the social, cultural, religious and ethnic diversity of the societies studied, in Britain and the wider world


    1. to identify and describe reasons for, and results of, historical events, situations, and changes in the periods studied


    1. to describe and make links between the main events, situations and changes within and across the different periods and societies studied.

<h3 id="ks2-historical-interpretation">Historical interpretation</h3>


3. Pupils should be taught to recognise that the past is represented and interpreted in different ways, and to give reasons for this.

<h3 id="ks2-historical-enquiry">Historical enquiry</h3>


4. Pupils should be taught:


    1. how to find out about the events, people and changes studied from an appropriate range of sources of information, including ICT-based sources (for example, documents, printed sources, CD-ROMS, databases, pictures and photographs, music, artefacts, historic buildings and visits to museums, galleries and sites)


    1. to ask and answer questions, and to select and record information relevant to the focus of the enquiry.

<h3 id="ks2-organisation-and-communication">Organisation and communication</h3>


5. Pupils should be taught to:


    1. recall, select and organise historical information


    1. use dates and historical vocabulary to describe the periods studied


    1. communicate their knowledge and understanding of history in a variety of ways (for example, drawing, writing, by using ICT).

<h2 id="ks2-breadth-of-study">Breadth of study</h2>


6. During the key stage, pupils should be taught the knowledge, skills and understanding through a local history study, three British history studies, a European history study and a world history study.

<h3 id="ks2-local-history-study">Local history study</h3>


7. A study investigating how an aspect in the local area has changed over a long period of time, or how the locality was affected by a significant national or local event or development or by the work of a significant individual.

<h3 id="ks2-british-history">British history</h3>


8. In their study of British history, pupils should be taught about:


    1. the Romans, Anglo-Saxons and Vikings; Britain and the wider world in Tudor times; and either Victorian Britain or Britain since 1930


    1. aspects of the histories of England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales, where appropriate, and about the history of Britain in its European and wider world context, in these periods.

<h3 id="ks2-romans,-anglo-saxons-and-vikings-in-britain">Romans, Anglo-Saxons and Vikings in Britain</h3>


9. An overview study of how British society was shaped by the movement and settlement of different peoples in the period before the Norman Conquest and an in-depth study of how British society was affected by Roman or Anglo-Saxon or Viking settlement.

<h3 id="ks2-britain-and-the-wider-world-in-tudor-times">Britain and the wider world in Tudor times</h3>


10. A study of some significant events and individuals, including Tudor monarchs, who shaped this period and of the everyday lives of men, women and children from different sections of society.

<h3 id="ks2-victorian-britain-or-britain-since-1930">Victorian Britain or Britain since 1930</h3>


11. Teachers can choose between a study of Victorian Britain or Britain since 1930.

    <h3 id="ks2-victorian-britain">Victorian Britain</h3>


    1. A study of the impact of significant individuals, events and changes in work and transport on the lives of men, women and children from different sections of society.

    <h3 id="ks2-britain-since-1930">Britain since 1930</h3>


    1. A study of the impact of the Second World War or social and technological changes that have taken place since 1930, on the lives of men, women and children from different sections of society.

<h3 id="ks2-a-european-history-study">A European history study</h3>


12. A study of the way of life, beliefs and achievements of the people living in Ancient Greece and the influence of their civilisation on the world today.

<h3 id="ks2-a-world-history-study">A world history study</h3>


13. A study of the key features, including the everyday lives of men, women and children, of a past society selected from: Ancient Egypt, Ancient Sumer, the Assyrian Empire, the Indus Valley, the Maya, Benin, or the Aztecs.

<h1 id="attainment-target-level-descriptions">Attainment target level descriptions</h1>

<h2 id="level-1">Level 1</h2>

Pupils recognise the distinction between present and past in their own and other people's lives. They show their emerging sense of chronology by placing a few events and objects in order, and by using everyday terms about the passing of time. They know and recount episodes from stories about the past. They find answers to some simple questions about the past from sources of information.

<h2 id="level-2">Level 2</h2>

Pupils show their developing sense of chronology by using terms concerned with the passing of time, by placing events and objects in order, and by recognising that their own lives are different from the lives of people in the past. They show knowledge and understanding of aspects of the past beyond living memory, and of some of the main events and people they have studied. They are beginning to recognise that there are reasons why people in the past acted as they did. They are beginning to identify some of the different ways in which the past is represented. They observe or handle sources of information to answer questions about the past on the basis of simple observations.

<h2 id="level-3">Level 3</h2>

Pupils show their developing understanding of chronology by their realisation that the past can be divided into different periods of time, their recognition of some of the similarities and differences between these periods, and their use of dates and terms. They show knowledge and understanding of some of the main events, people and changes studied. They are beginning to give a few reasons for, and results of, the main events and changes. They identify some of the different ways in which the past is represented. They use sources of information in ways that go beyond simple observations to answer questions about the past.

<h2 id="level-4">Level 4</h2>

Pupils show factual knowledge and understanding of aspects of the history of Britain and the wider world. They use this to describe characteristic features of past societies and periods, and to identify changes within and across different periods. They describe some of the main events, people and changes. They give some reasons for, and results of, the main events and changes. They show some understanding that aspects of the past have been represented and interpreted in different ways. They are beginning to select and combine information from different sources. They are beginning to produce structured work, making appropriate use of dates and terms.

<h2 id="level-5">Level 5</h2>

Pupils show increasing depth of factual knowledge and understanding of aspects of the history of Britain and the wider world. They use this to describe features of past societies and periods and to begin to make links between them. They describe events, people and changes. They describe and make links between events and changes and give reasons for, and results of, these events and changes. They know that some events, people and changes have been interpreted in different ways and suggest possible reasons for this. Using their knowledge and understanding, pupils are beginning to evaluate sources of information and identify those that are useful for particular tasks. They select and organise information to produce structured work, making appropriate use of dates and terms.

<h2 id="level-6">Level 6</h2>

Pupils use their factual knowledge and understanding of the history of Britain and the wider world to describe past societies and periods, and to make links between features within and across different periods. They examine and explain the reasons for, and results of, events and changes. Pupils describe, and begin to analyse, why there are different historical interpretations of events, people and changes. Using their knowledge and understanding, they identify and evaluate sources of information, which they use critically to reach and support conclusions. They select, organise and deploy relevant information to produce structured work, making appropriate use of dates and terms.

<h2 id="level-7">Level 7</h2>

Pupils make links between their factual knowledge and understanding of the history of Britain and the wider world. They use these links to analyse relationships between features of a particular period or society, and to analyse reasons for, and results of, events and changes. They explain how and why different historical interpretations have been produced. Pupils show some independence in following lines of enquiry, using their knowledge and understanding to identify, evaluate and use sources of information critically. They sometimes reach substantiated conclusions independently. They select, organise and use relevant information to produce well-structured narratives, descriptions and explanations, making appropriate use of dates and terms.

<h2 id="level-8">Level 8</h2>

Pupils use their factual knowledge and understanding of the history of Britain and the wider world to analyse the relationships between events, people and changes, and between the features of different past societies and cultures. Their explanations of reasons for, and results of, events and changes are set in a wider historical context. They analyse and explain different historical interpretations and are beginning to evaluate them. Drawing on their historical knowledge and understanding, they use sources of information critically, carry out historical enquiries, and reach substantiated conclusions independently. They select, organise and deploy relevant information to produce consistently well-structured narratives, descriptions and explanations, making appropriate use of dates and terms.

<h2 id="exceptional-performance">Exceptional performance</h2>

Pupils use their extensive and detailed factual knowledge and understanding of the history of Britain and the wider world to analyse relationships between a wide range of events, people, ideas and changes and between the features of different past societies and cultures. Their explanations and analyses of reasons for, and results of, events and changes, are well substantiated and set in their wider historical context. They analyse links between events and developments that took place in different countries and in different periods. They make balanced judgements based on their understanding of the historical context about the value of different interpretations of historical events and developments. Drawing on their historical knowledge and understanding, they use sources of information critically, carry out historical enquiries, develop, maintain and support an argument and reach and sustain substantiated and balanced conclusions independently. They select, organise and deploy a wide range of relevant information to produce consistently well-structured narratives, descriptions and explanations, making appropriate use of dates and terms.